marquee release post (#695)
tidyverse/tidyverse.org: content/blog/marquee-1-0-0/index.Rmd

    for rich text formatting in R graphics.

photo:
  url: https://unsplash.com/photos/a-close-up-of-a-metal-grate-on-a-table-9jfpVAhGC1g
  author: Etienne Girardet

# one of: "deep-dive", "learn", "package", "programming", "roundup", or "other"
categories: [package] 
tags: [marquee, ggplot2]
---

```{=html}
<!--
TODO:
* [x] Look over / edit the post's title in the yaml
* [x] Edit (or delete) the description; note this appears in the Twitter card
* [x] Pick category and tags (see existing with `hugodown::tidy_show_meta()`)
* [x] Find photo & update yaml metadata
* [x] Create `thumbnail-sq.jpg`; height and width should be equal
* [x] Create `thumbnail-wd.jpg`; width should be >5x height
* [x] `hugodown::use_tidy_thumbnails()`
* [x] Add intro sentence, e.g. the standard tagline for the package
* [-] `usethis::use_tidy_thanks()`
-->
```
```{r, include=FALSE}
knitr::opts_chunk$set(
  dpi = 300,
  dev = "ragg_png"
)
```

I am super excited to announce the initial release of [marquee](https://marquee.r-lib.org), a markdown parser and renderer for R graphics that allows native rich text formatting of text in graphics created with grid (which includes ggplot2 and lattice).

> The inception of this package goes all the way back to 2017

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The inception of this package goes all the way back to 2017:
```

```{r}
library(ggplot2)
# Add styling around the first word
red_bold_names <- sub("(\\w+)", "{.red **\\1**}", rownames(mtcars))

ggplot(mtcars) + 
  geom_marquee(aes(x = mpg, y = disp, label = red_bold_names))
```

Apart from standard, but markdown-aware, `geom_text()` behaviour, the geom also gains a `width` aesthetic that allows you to turn on automatic soft wrapping of the text. In addition to this it gains a `style` aesthetic to finely control the style (more about styling below)

### `element_marquee()`

The second obvious use for marquee in ggplot2 is in formatting text elements. `element_marquee()` is a replacement for `element_text()` that does just that.

```{r}
ggplot(mtcars) + 
  geom_point(aes(x = mpg, y = disp)) + 
  ggtitle(md_text) + 
  theme(plot.title = element_marquee(size = 8, width = unit(16, "cm")))
```

## Styling

As alluded to above, marquee comes with a styling API that is reminiscent of CSS but completely its own. In some sense it takes the "simplicity over power" approach from markdown and applies it to styling.

> In marquee, each element type (e.g. a code block) has its own style. This style can be incomplete in which case it inherits the remaining specifications from the parent element in the document. As an example, the `em` element has the following default style `style(italic = TRUE)`, that is, take whatever style is currently in effect but set the text to italic. This is basically how CSS works as well, but CSS allows so much more which clutters both the API and implementation if all you ever want to do is format rich text.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In marquee, each element type (e.g. a code block) has its own style. This style can be incomplete in which case it inherits the remaining specifications from the parent element in the document. As an example, the `em` element has the following default style `style(italic = TRUE)`, that is, take whatever style is currently in effect but also make the text italic.
```

Don't think mention of CSS really adds anything here

> Apart from the direct inheritance of the marquee styling, it is also possible to use relative inheritance for numeric specifications (e.g. `lineheight = relative(2)` to double the current lineheight) or set sizes based on the current or root element font size (using `em()` and `rem()` respectively). Lastly, you can also mark a specification as "non-inheritable" using `skip_inherit()` in which case the inheritance moves up one level.

Reviewer: I don't get what this means.

Author: if you set a value as `skip_inherit()` you say that any children should not inherit this value but instead the parent value. I'll try to come up with a better explanation

> Marquee ships with a single style set (`classic_style()`) and you can make your own, either by modifying this, or building your own from scratch. If you choose the latter route make sure that the base element is a complete style - everything beyond that is optional.

Reviewer: I'd be somewhat tempted to just drop this in favour of pointing to the appropriate place in the marquee docs. It seems pretty advanced.

All of the above is pretty standard markdown and since I prefixed this whole blog post with "full markdown support" it shouldn't come as a big surprise. However, marquee has one last trick up its sleeve: R graphics interpolation. Quite simply, if you, instead of providing a path to a file, provide the name of an R variable holding a graphic object, this will be included as an image. Here's how it works:

```{r, fig.asp=0.9}
plot <- ggplot(mtcars) + 
  geom_point(aes(mpg, disp)) + 
  geom_point(aes(mpg, disp), mtcars[1,], colour = "red", size = 3)

point <- grid::pointsGrob(x = 0.5, y = 0.5, pch = 19, gp = grid::gpar(col = "red"))

md_plots <- 
"# Plots
In the plot below, the red dot (![](point)) shows the Mazda RX4

![](plot)
"

grid::grid.draw(marquee_grob(md_plots))
```

> 

Reviewer: I think you should you should add something like:

> This means that you can now [include a ggplot2 plot in an annotation of another plot](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g3j9muCo4o0)!

Lastly, while not really part of HTML syntax directly, many people rely on HTML inside markdown documents to solve layout and styling tasks that markdown doesn't support. The way it works is that markdown passes the HTML through unmodified and then the HTML is parsed by the HTML renderer (often the browser) used to display the rendered markdown document. This makes it seem like understanding HTML is part of markdown, while it's really not. The reason I'm going through all this explanation is to say that marquee has no understanding of HTML and will not render it as expected. While some HTML tags and CSS settings have clear counterparts in markdown and the marquee styling system it is much better to have a clear "no-support" over an arbitrary limited support. `marquee_grob()`/`marquee_parse()` have an argument (`ignore_html`) that controls whether HTML are outright removed from the output (default), or if it is included verbatim.

## Acknowledgements

> Marquee is the latest in a stream of advancements when it comes to text rendering and font support in R. It builds on top of my work with [systemfonts](https://systemfonts.r-lib.org/index.html), [textshaping](https://github.com/r-lib/textshaping), and [ragg](https://ragg.r-lib.org/index.html), but also pays great dept to Paul Murrell's work on adding a new, more low level API for text rendering to grid and the graphics engine. Lastly, Claus Wilke's work on [gridtext](https://wilkelab.org/gridtext/) and [ggtext](https://wilkelab.org/ggtext/) showed the power and need for rich text support in R and filled a gap until the technical foundation for marquee was build out.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Marquee is the latest in a stream of advancements when it comes to text rendering and font support in R. It builds on top of my work with [systemfonts](https://systemfonts.r-lib.org/index.html), [textshaping](https://github.com/r-lib/textshaping), and [ragg](https://ragg.r-lib.org/index.html), but also pays great dept to Paul Murrell's work on adding a new, more low level API for text rendering to grid and the graphics engine. Lastly, Claus Wilke's work on [gridtext](https://wilkelab.org/gridtext/) and [ggtext](https://wilkelab.org/ggtext/) showed the power and need for rich text support in R and filled a gap until the technical foundation for marquee was built out.
```
